Kubernetes Configuration Provider for Apache Kafka (#37)
strimzi/proposals: 027-kubernetes-config-provider.md

# Kubernetes Configuration Provider for Apache Kafka

This proposal suggests to create a configuration provider for reading data from Kubernetes Secrets and Config Maps.

## Current situation

> Apache Kafka supports pluggable configuration providers which can load configuration data from external sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apache Kafka supports pluggable configuration providers for loading configuration data from external sources.
```

They can be used in the configuration of the different components.
By default, Kafka provides two configuration providers:

> * FileConfigProvider for reading configuration records from properties files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `FileConfigProvider` for reading configuration records, as key-value pairs, from a single properties file
```

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Author: It reads the whole file and passes it into the configuration.

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Reviewer 2: "Directory" let me think that it reads all the directory content (so all files) but if this is how it works ... "complete files" is not clear at least to me.

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Author: That is the name used in Kafka - not something I made up. I think it logically follows the `FileConfigProvider` ... `FileConfigProvider` picks one or more keys from a single file. `DirectoryConfigProvider` picks one or more files from a directory. So it is logically consistent, but a little bit unintuitive.

How would you change this bullet point then to make it more clear?

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Reviewer 2: Yeah I know it comes from Kafka ... maybe something like "for reading configuration from all files in the specified folder/directory"? It's just the part "complete files" which doesn't sound clear to me. Maybe @PaulRMellor @laidan6000 can help here much better than me?

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Author: It does not necessarily read all files from the directory. That depends on how you call it. The key difference is that it does not treat the file as key-value store and read only some values but it reads the file from the first tot he last _byte_.

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `DirectoryConfigProvider` for reading configuration from complete files
```

> * DirectoryConfigProvider for reading configuration from complete files

Reviewer: I really don't know! Maybe update the second point as you've described it above.

>  `DirectoryConfigProvider` for reading one or more configuration files from a specified directory (files are read from start to finish)

> In addition, users can implement their own configuration providers as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, users can implement their own configuration providers.
```

## Motivation

> Strimzi is using Kubernetes Secrets to store different information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Strimzi uses Kubernetes Secrets to store different types of information.
```

> For example cluster or user certificates or user passwords.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, cluster or user certificates or user passwords.
```

Kafka clients (or other components) running in the same namespace can mount the secrets as volumes or environment variables and use them.
But this does not work for applications running in other namespaces or outside the Kubernetes cluster.
They have to either copy the secrets into their namespace or extract the files to use them.

> Users also need to make sure that they data are kept in sync and update them when the original secrets change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users also need to make sure that their data are kept in sync and update them when the original secrets change.
```

Having a configuration provider which can extract these data directly from the Kubernetes API would eliminate these issues.

> It would allow to load the configuration data from Kubernetes API even from other namespaces or outside of the Kubernetes cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would allow users to load the configuration data from the Kubernetes API, even from other namespaces or outside of the Kubernetes cluster.
```

Users would just need to use the configuration provider from their properties and have the data pulled from Kubernetes directly.
Loading the configuration data directly from Kubernetes API will also solve the issues with keeping the data up-to-date since they will be loaded directly from the source.

## Proposal

We should create a new configuration provider which would load data from Kubernetes Secrets and Config Maps.

> Secrets and Config Maps are a key-value stores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Secrets and Config Maps are both key-value stores.
```

The configuration provider will get the Secret or Config Map and extract the desired keys from them.

It will use the Fabric8 Kubernetes client to communicate with the Kubernetes API.
There will be no special configuration for connecting to the Kubernetes cluster.
It will just use the default auto-detection of Kubernetes credentials from `kubeconfig` file, mounted tokens etc.
In addition, users can use the Fabric8 environment variables or Java system properties to configure the client.

The configuration provider only reads the requested Config Map or Secret.

> The only RBAC rights it needs is the `get` access rights on given resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only RBAC rights it needs is the `get` access rights on a given resource.
```

For example:

```yaml
- apiGroups: [""]
  resources: ["secrets"]
  resourceNames: ["my-cluster-cluster-ca-cert"]
  verbs: ["get"]
```

Thanks to that users should be able to give the configuration provider only very restricted access to just the selected resources.

> To use the configuration provider, the user will need to configure his client like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the configuration provider, the user will need to configure their client like this:
```
In the interests of using inclusive language, gender neutral language is probably the best for appearances

```properties
config.providers=secrets
config.providers.secrets.class=io.strimzi.kafka.KubernetesSecretConfigProvider
security.protocol=SSL
ssl.keystore.type=PEM
ssl.keystore.certificate.chain=${secrets:myproject/my-user:user.crt}
ssl.keystore.key=${secrets:myproject/my-user:user.key}
ssl.truststore.type=PEM
ssl.truststore.certificates=${secrets:myproject/my-cluster-cluster-ca-cert:ca.crt}
```

The configuration provider should use a separate GitHub repository under the Strimzi GitHub organization.

> The repository should be named `kafka-kubernetes.config-provider`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The repository should be named `kafka-kubernetes-config-provider`.
```
